Now we'll take a small detour to get some terms straight.
These terms are similar enough in meaning that
they often get mixed up, misused, and abused.
But this course wouldn't be complete without making sure that you're
equipped to use them correctly and understand their unique differences.
Asynchronous. As we already covered,
asynchronous and non-blocking are synonyms.
It means that we make more efficient use of our thread by
letting it continue with work while another task is idle or waiting.
Essentially, it is good time management when working on a single thread.
Concurrent and parallel are terms you have probably heard thrown around.
But what do they actually mean,
and are they at all related to asynchronicity?
Asynchronous is all about managing one thread well.
Concurrent and parallel are terms that refer to dealing with multithreaded scenarios.
There are a lot of opinions when it comes to defining these two terms,
which has made even more difficult to navigate because we are talking
about things that are hard to picture and give clear definitions to.
I've tried to gather the most correct definitions of these terms
that I can and tried to give them the clearest definition.
But don't be surprised if you hear a different or even conflicting definition elsewhere,
especially as some programming languages even implement these concepts differently.
In the end, getting it to work correctly for
your program in the language you're using is the most important thing,
and a definition won't change the end result.
But I'm going to try.
Parallel is perhaps the more clearly definable of the two terms.
Parallel programs leverage multiple threads to execute tasks simultaneously.
The key here is that three things are happening at
the same time on three separate threads.
The term concurrent has slightly different meanings in
different programming languages because of how each language achieves this effect.
But it is enough to say that concurrent programs achieve results by
breaking code up into pieces and then switching between those pieces very quickly.
Those pieces though, are running on multiple threads with one active thread at a time.
The best analogy I ever heard for this is chatting or texting people.
Parallel would be writing two messages to two different people at exactly the same time.
Not exactly possible for humans,
but possible for computers.
Concurrent would be if you have
multiple text conversations going on with different people at the same time,
you are talking to many people,
but only by actively talking to one person at a time.
The effect is that you are having multiple conversations,
but you're achieving that by switching between conversations.
That is effectively how concurrent programs work.
There are pros and cons to each of these three strategies.
So even though parallel walks away from this challenge with the best overall time,
there are still reasons you would choose the others.
In JavaScript, for instance, we don't have a choice.
We have to choose asynchronous because JavaScript is not multithreaded.
In languages that do support multi-threading,
writing those programs comes with their very own sets of challenges and difficulties,
but they can achieve impressive performance.